Response to Could information theory provide an ecological theory of sensory
processing? Evan Shelhamer

  The sparse coding of sensory inputs and the compact representation of memory
traces are both desirable in a biological system. The nervous system is often
the largest draw of vital oxygen and glucose so any means of maximizing its
efficiency would have adaptive value. Since the brain relies on the
electrochemical activity of a finite set of neurons (of limited dynamic range)
to code and process information, a system that permits the greatest
discrimination from the fewest axonal firings would be optimal in energy cost.
An information-theoretic scheme that minimizes the entropy of sensory inputs
satisfies this requirement. The compact coding created by decorrelating input in
this way is more metabolically efficient than dense codes, may pass more
information up through the cortical hierarchy, and could facilitate pattern
recognition by supplying independent components as robust building blocks. The
theory proposed by Joseph Atick's paper satisfies the conditions for these
benefits to be possible and generates predictions that quantitatively agree with
physiological measurements. Furthermore, the mechanisms it employs can be
plausibly carried out in the known retinal cell-interneuron-ganglion neural
structure of early visual processing in primates. I support the conclusions of
theory.

  The simplified model of low-level visual processing presented in the paper is
reasonable. The receptive field characteristics of retinal cells, their
interneuron connections, and ganglionic outputs have been well-studied in
cognitive psychology; the central aspects of retinal modulation, opponency, and
physiological adaptation are honored in this theory. The translation invariance
assumption is permissible given the small impact of angle of incidence within
the confines of individual receptive fields. Background luminance and
physiological adaptation were controlled for in the observation of response
measurements by observing rapid deviations from an adapted background
illumination, which are only attributable to neural processing given the sheer
rate of change. Evidence that these assumptions have not led the analysis astray
is provided by the resemblance of the derived retinal kernel to the receptive
fields of actual primate retinal-ganglionic cells (shown in Figure 5, p. 232).

  The predictions fit known ganglionic response curves and are arrived at by
operations that could be implemented by neurons. Figures 1 & 10 show contrast
sensitivity plots that match predictions for the wildly different systems of the
blowfly LMC (large monopolar cells) and the retinal neurons of primates
respectively. The generality of the results demonstrated across these examples
and distinct types of opponency seen in primate and freshwater fish retinas
suggests this information-theoretic view may broadly help to explain immediate
sensory perception. The linear transformations involved in the decorrelation of
sensory signals could be embodied by varying firing rates of interneurons in the
visual processing path. The final mixing of the derived independent luminance
and chromatic channels could be accomplished by the same means. The extent of
the decorrelation, or “whitening” to speak of frequencies, is observed to be
bounded at the noise floor of retinal cells. This indicates that the whitening
is performed to improve perceptual processing, since it is only performed in the
signal range to avoid amplification of noise. This is reinforced by the observed
switch between bandpass and lowpass type filtering as background luminance on
the retina is decreased. That the retinal assembly stage is only capable of
eliminating pairwise correlation is of no weakness of the theory. Higher order
statistics can be extracted further up in visual hierarchy, as is observed in
the more statistically complex receptive fields of the V2 and V4 areas. Given
the intuitive reasoning behind the benefits of efficient coding, the agreement
of predictions with neurological observations, and the theory's adherence to
known modes of neural activity, the argument for an minimum-entropy sensory
strategy is valid.
